# Cartesian Genetic Programming General Use Module

This repository contains the work done primarily by Rachel Kocherovsky for her PhD studies at Michigan State University. If you intend to use this code, please cite whichever of the following papers is more relevant to your work:

* Mark Kocherovsky, Wolfgang Banzhaf; July 22–26, 2024. "Crossover Destructiveness in Cartesian versus Linear Genetic Programming." Proceedings of the ALIFE 2024: Proceedings of the 2024 Artificial Life Conference. ALIFE 2024: Proceedings of the 2024 Artificial Life Conference. Online. (pp. 20). ASME. https://doi.org/10.1162/isal_a_00735

* Kocherovsky, M., Kianinejad, M., Bakurov, I., Banzhaf, W. (2025). On the Effectiveness of Crossover Operators in Cartesian Genetic Programming. In: Xue, B., Manzoni, L., Bakurov, I. (eds) Genetic Programming. EuroGP 2025. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 15609. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-89991-1_5

* Kocherovsky, Mark, Illya Bakurov, and Wolfgang Banzhaf. "Node Preservation and its Effect on Crossover in Cartesian Genetic Programming." arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.00634 (2025).

---

# Installation:

To install, please clone the repository into your working directory. You may need to alter import paths according to the directory structure of your system.

Once cloned, you can navigate to cgp/src/cgp and run ``pip install -e .`` to install. After this, you can import as needed.

---

# Basic Tutorial:

The top-level evolution module is ``CartesianGP`` in ``cgp_evolver.py``. It is used as such:

```
evolution_module = CartesianGP(self, parents=1, children=4, max_generations=100, mutation='Point', selection='Elite',
                 xover=None, fixed_length=True, fitness_function='correlation', model_parameters=None,
                 function_bank=None, solution_threshold=0.005, checkpoint_filename='checkpoint.pkl', seed=42,
                 dnc_hp: dict = None, **kwargs)
```

**Parameters:**

``parents``: ``int``

Number of parent individuals to generate at start and select during each generation.

``children``: ``int``

Number of child individuals to generate during the crossover and/or mutation phase.

``max_generations``: ``int``

Number of generations for evolution. Checkpointing is turned on by default.

``mutation``: ``str``

Type of mutation to use. The options are:

* ``point``: Traditional point mutation. A random value within an instruction is chosen and randomly changed to another legal value.
* ``full``: "Full" or "Node" mutation. A random instruction is replaced by a new legal randomly generated instruction.

``selection``: ``str``

Selection algorithm to use. By default, diversity is forced, meaning that once an individual is chosen to be a parent, it cannot be selected again in the same generation. This ensures that population diversity is maintained, to a point.

The possible selection algorithms are:

* ``elite``: Elite selection. The top ``x`` individuals are selected to be parents.
* ``tournament``: Tournament selection. A set of ``x`` individuals are compared; the best of that subset is chosen to be a new parent. This repeats until the specified number of parents are chosen. The tournament size is 2 by default, and otherwise specified by the optional argument ``tournament_size``.
* ``elite_tournament``: Elite Tournament selection. The top ``x`` individuals are selected to be parents. The rest undergo tournament selection. The number of elites (seperate from plain elite selection) is given by the optional argument ``n_elites``, which is 1 by default.
* ``competent_tournament``: Comptent Tournament Selection. **UNTESTED**. A geometric semantic method, please see T. P. Pawlak and K. Krawiec, "Competent Geometric Semantic Genetic Programming for Symbolic Regression and Boolean Function Synthesis," in Evolutionary Computation, vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 177-212, June 2018, doi: 10.1162/evco_a_00205.
* ``paretoelite``: Pareto elite selection. See Kotanchek, Mark & Smits, Guido & Vladislavleva, Ekaterina (Katya). (2007). Pursuing the Pareto Paradigm: Tournaments, Algorithm Variations and Ordinal Optimization. 10.1007/978-0-387-49650-4_11.  
* ``paretotournament``: Pareto tournament selection. See Kotanchek, Mark & Smits, Guido & Vladislavleva, Ekaterina (Katya). (2007). Pursuing the Pareto Paradigm: Tournaments, Algorithm Variations and Ordinal Optimization. 10.1007/978-0-387-49650-4_11.

``xover``: ``str``

Type of crossover to use. Note that crossover requires that ``parents > 1``. The options are:
* ``none``: No Crossover. By default, children will be generated by mutation.
* ``n_point``: N-Point crossover. The value of ``n`` is 1 by default, and otherwise specified by the optional argument ``n_points``.
* ``uniform``: Uniform crossover. Functionally equivalent to ``size/2``-point crossover.
* ``subgraph``: **Currently Recommended Method**, Subgraph crossover developed by Roman Kalkreuth. Please see Roman Kalkreuth. Reconsideration and Extension of Cartesian Genetic Programming. PhD thesis, Department of Computer Science, University of Dortmund, December 2021.
* ``semantic_uniform``: Semantic Uniform Crossover.
* ``aligned_semantic_uniform`` Aligned Semantic Uniform Crossover.
* ``aligned_homologous_semantic_uniform``: Aligned Homologous Semantic Uniform Crossover.
* ``homologous_semantic_uniform``: Homologous Semantic Uniform Crossover.
* ``semantic_n_point``: Semantic N-Point Crossover.
* ``homologous_semantic_n_point``: Homologous Semantic N-Point Crossover.
* ``aligned_homologous_semantic_n_point``: Aligned Homologous Semantic N-Point Crossover.
* ``aligned_semantic_n_point`` Aligned Semantic N-Point Crossover.
* ``dnc_n_point``: **currently commented out, not recommended**, Deep Neural N-Point Crossover.
* ``dnc_uniform``: **currently commented out, not recommended**, Deep Neural Uniform Crossover.
* ``dnc_semantic_n_point``: **Failed Experiment. Do Not Use.``
* ``dnc_semantic_uniform``: **Failed Experiment. Do Not Use.``

Note that all Semantic n-point methods are currently under testing, and all Deep Neural Crossover methods are commented out since they are not recommended. Although the code is left here for reference to Kocherovsky et al. 2025, the original DNC code might not be available anymore. Use at your own risk.

For Deep Neural Crossover, please see Eliad Shem-Tov and Achiya Elyasaf. 2024. Deep Neural Crossover: A Multi-Parent Operator That Leverages Gene Correlations. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference (GECCO '24). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1045–1053. https://doi.org/10.1145/3638529.3654020.

``fixed_length``: ``Bool``

This value is ``True`` by default. If ``True``, all CGP individuals will have the same specified length. Otherwise, they may be of different lengths.

``fitness_function``: ``str``

Which fitness function to use. The only valid options at this point are ``correlation`` and ``correlation_complexity``, although both point to the same correlation function, since the latter was replaced by pareto tournament selection. Both use the Pearson Correlation to determine fitness, although you will need to ``align`` the model to the target data for use in predictions. ``align`` is found in ``fitness_functions.py``.

Please see Haut, N., Banzhaf, W., Punch, B. (2023). Correlation Versus RMSE Loss Functions in Symbolic Regression Tasks. In: Trujillo, L., Winkler, S.M., Silva, S., Banzhaf, W. (eds) Genetic Programming Theory and Practice XIX. Genetic and Evolutionary Computation. Springer, Singapore. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-19-8460-0_2.

``model_parameters``: ``Dict``

Parameters to use for generating individuals. Please see the **Model Generation** section below.

``function_bank``: ``List``

List of possible operators for the CGP model. ``cgp_operators.py`` includes some examples (``add``, ``sub``(tract), ``mul``(tiply), and ``div``(ide, in reality the Analytic Quotient) for regression, and ``AND``, ``OR``, ``NOT``, and ``XOR`` for boolean problems.

``solution_threshold``: ``Float``

Currently unused. Minimum "good enough" error needed to stop a run pre-emptively.

``checkpoint_filename``: ``str``

Filename for checkpointing.

``seed``: ``int``

Random seed

``dnc_hp``: ``Dict``

Hyperparameters for Deep Neural Crossover. See the notes on DNC in the ``xover`` parameter. **Using Deep Neural Crossover is not recommended.**

``**kwargs``:
Additional arguments. These are:
* ``tournament_size: int``: Size of each tournament for tournament selection, the default value is 2. It is recommended that ``tournament_size > parents+children``.
* ``n_elites: int``: Number of elites to select before moving to tournament selection for Elite Tournament selection, the default value is 0.
* ``n_points: int``: number of points for n-point crossover, the default value is 1.
* ``tournament_diversity: Bool``: Whether the same parent is allowed to be picked twice for a competition in tournament selection. This value is ``True`` by default.
* ``one_d: Bool``: Whether crossover is handled by gene (``True``) or by instruction (``False``). This value is ``False`` by default, and using the 1D crossovers are **not** recommended. This will only work with n-point or uniform crossover.
* ``asexual_reproduction``: Whether asexual reproduction is allowed. This will be turned on if there are less than two parents by default, and is otherwise ``False`` unless you specify a ``True``.

---

# Running the Evolution Module

With the ``evolution_module`` declared above, we can run

```
best_model, best_test_model = evolution_module.fit(train_x: np.ndarray, test_x: np.ndarray, train_y: np.ndarray, test_y: np.ndarray,
            step_size: int = None,
            xover_rate: float = 0.5, mutation_rate: float = 0.5)
```

**Parameters**

``train_x``: ``np.ndarray``

Training input data. Can be of any shape provided that the organization of data is hierarchical. There is no reason not to organize data that way anyways. Using ``sklearn.model_selection.train_test_split`` is generally recommended but not required.

``test_x``: ``np.ndarray``

Testing input data. Must be the same shape as ``train_x``.

``train_y``: ``np.ndarray``

Training target data.

``test_y``: ``np.ndarray``

Testing target data.

``step_size``: ``int``

For a value of ``x``, the program will report on the best fitness every ``x`` generations.

``xover_rate``: ``Float``

Crossover rate.

``mutation_rate``: ``Float``

Mutation rate.

---

# Saving Data

We can save our metrics for each generation with

```evolution_module.save_metrics(run_path)```

where ``run_path`` is a file. The metrics stored are:
* Correlation (min, 1st quartile, median, 3rd quartile, max)
* Test Correlation (same as Correlation but for test data)
* Complexity (same as Correlation but for proportion of active nodes)
* Fitness and Fitness test (by default identical to correlation)
* Number of active nodes in the best model
* Active nodes quartiles
* Semantic Diversity

---

# Model Parameters

An individual model is initialized using the ``CGP`` class:
```
model = CGP(model=None, model_keys=None, fixed_length=True, fitness_function='Correlation',
                 mutation_type='Point',
                 parent_keys=None, xover_length=None, **kwargs)
```

which takes the following **parameters**:

``model``:``CGP``

A CGP model preloaded from a file, used to assign the necessary parameters. Currently untested.

``model_keys``: Depreciated for the moment in favor of internal ``uuid`` tracking.

``fixed_length``: Whether the model has to be a specific size. By default, CGP individuals should all have ``fixed_length = True``. This is recommended practice.

``fitness_function``: See the section on the ``CartesianGP`` module.

``mutation_type``: See the section on the ``CartesianGP`` module.

``parent_keys``: Depreciated

``xover_length``: I genuinely don't remember what this is for. It seems unused.

``**kwargs``: **This is to contain the actual parameters for generating new models**. The possible kwargs are:

* ``constants``: ``List``: List of allowed constants. This value is ``[1]`` by default, although I personally use ``[0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]``.
* ``inputs``: Number of input nodes. This should be equal to the number of features of each data instance. The default value is 1.
* ``outputs``: Number of output nodes. If you are expecting ``n`` output values, this value should be equal to ``n``. The default value is 1
* ``arity``: Number of inputs taken by each node. This is 2 by default since the default operators are binary (add, subtract, etc.)
* ``max_size``: Number of nodes to generate for the model, assuming ``fixed_length=True``.

**Using the model**

To test the fitness of an individual model, we can call

```
error, complexity, fitness = model.fit(x_train, y_train, mutable=True)
```

By default, ``error`` and ``fitness`` will be equal. If you want to add a new fitness function that will not simply return the error, then this is built for such a scenario. However, it is preferable to use some form of Pareto selection.

The ``mutable`` parameter is only used for the model's reported active nodes. It is recommended to keep it ``True`` since it is mainly for developer testing.

Finally, we can call the model using

```
predictions = model(input_data, mutable=True)
```

and print the model using

```
model.print_model()
```

---

I am aware that this is rather disorganized and messy. I hope to clean it up eventually but that's dependent on my available time.

---

# Conda environment

Please see cgp_libs.txt for the Conda environment libraries. This package is compiled in **python 3.11.13**.
